automatic: this skill is used automatically
worker At the end of every turn if worker is in countryside and he didn't move this turn, he earns you one primary and one secondary goodie (wood, gold, food) and one more primary goodie if he is in his native grounds
engineer At the end of every turn if worker is in countryside and he didn't move this turn, he earns you two primary and one secondary goodie (wood, gold, food)
hillbilly One free movement in forested hills. Invisibility in forested hills. Currently invisible units cannot acquire territory
redneck One free movement in forested hills. Invisibility in forested hills. Can acquire territory
swimmer Invisible in swampy river. Currently invisible units cannot acquire territory
fish Can move only in swampy river and bases. Invisible to all except scouts in swampy river
stalker One free movement in swampy river. Invisibility in swampy river. Currently invisible units cannot acquire territory
gollum One free movement in swampy river. Invisibility in swampy river. Can acquire territory
rider One free movement in plains. Strong attack bonus on plains and swampy river but only if free movement was already spent
postman One free movement in plains. Strong attack bonus on plains and swampy river but only if free movement was already spent. Invisible in plains
firststrike Attack first in every melee combat
monk Attack before firststrikes in every melee combat
slowstrike Attacks second in every melee combat
retarded Attacks after secondstrikes in every melee combat
flying Can fly over enemy without the need of engaging the combat. Cannot be attacked by ground units except for shooters. DOES engage in combat if voluntarily ends his movement at enemy-occupied sector
ace Can fly over enemy without the need of engaging the combat. Cannot be attacked by ground units except for shooters.
haste Can act and travel immediately after summoning
frantic Can act and travel immediately after summoning. Have a +2 movement first round in the game
defender Can defend even after moving (unit is still 'moved' for all the other checks)
vigilance Can defend even after moving (unit is still 'moved' for all the other checks)
trample Deals extra damage to all enemy creatures in given sector if successes in killing his primary enemy
crusher Deals extra damage to all enemy creatures in given sector if successes in killing his primary enemy
wallcrusher Crushes the walls really fast
aladdin Crushes the walls really really fast
provoke Allways wins the initiative check, even against shooters and 'unmoved' defenders. Provoking creature can allways choose his target
peacekeeper Allways wins the initiative check, even against shooters and 'unmoved' defenders. Provoking creature can allways choose his target
flanking Have a combat bonus if outnumbered
chariot Have a major combat bonus if outnumbered
immune Immune to magic (spell vanishes if targeting this creature). Cannot be equipped
hexproof Immune to magic (spell vanishes if targeting this creature). Can be equipped
fear At the end of every combat all enemy survivors must success in check against desertion, otherwise they vanish away. The more the unit is wounded the more vulnerable to desertion it is
panic At the end of every combat all enemy survivors must success in check against desertion, otherwise they vanish away. The more the unit is wounded the more vulnerable to desertion it is
carrier Prevents engaged enemy from healing
poisonous Poisons engaged enemy
ill cannot heal
poisoned cannot heal and lose some hp each turn
marksman Doesn't have a penalty for aiming cornered sectors as a taget of shooting attack. 50% smaller penalty for longer distance.
sniper Doesn't have a penalty for distance at all. 50% smaller forrested hills coverage penalty
healer Gives healing bonus to all friends in the same sector
shaman Gives healing bonus to all friends in the same sector. Removes the 'ill' and 'poisoned' effects for friends in the same sector
decoy prevents himself and one enemy from engaging in combat. The ability is mandatory to use and it comes even before the shooting phase
hannibal prevents himself and one enemy from engaging in combat. The ability is mandatory to use and it comes even before the shooting phase
thrower Throwing attack at the beginning of melee duel. Can engage flying creature
aimer Strong throwing attack at the beginning of melee duel. Can engage flying creatures
caster 25% stronger spells. Allows player to cast instants in given sector.
wizard 50% stronger spells. Allows player to cast instants in given sector.
scout Can detect everyone in given area (wilderness or one of bases)
ranger Can detect everyone on the whole battlefield
coward Can flee from the fight.
rat Can flee from the fight. Have a 1 free movement this turn
visionary Adds +1 mana bonus to every land search feature supported by mana this turn if unmoved or at the base.
prophet Doubles mana bonus to every land search feature supported by mana this turn if unmoved or at the base.
spy Invisible in enemy base. Small debuff for the strongest enemy in fight (with a friendly unit)
greema Invisible in enemy base. Debuff for the strongest enemy in fight (with a friendly unit)
mentat Invisible in home base. Small debuff for the strongest enemy in fight (with a friendly unit)
piter Invisible in home base. Debuff for the strongest enemy in fight (with a friendly unit)
smith Stronger buildings
builder Much stronger buildings
leader +0 / +1 bonus to all subtype sharing friends of given sector
sergeant +1 / +1 bonus to all subtype sharing friends of given sector
commander +0 / +1 bonus to all subtype sharing friends in given area (wilderness or one of bases)
general +1 / +1 bonus to all subtype sharing friends in given area (wilderness or one of bases)
ghoul resurrect unit killed (at least partially) by this unit. Doesn't work if there are four friendly units in field
unsummon returns unit to it's owner hands
buff increase attack and/or defense for this fight
regen regenerates creature to half of its hitpoints
heal heals all friends in given sector (a bit)
